Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobsson. Today
I'm joined by Doctor David Kolnitsky. He's an associate
professor in the department of sociology at the University
of Western Ontario. His research interests include sociological theory,
social policy, and poverty, and his empirical work has
a. Examine the impact of basic income on the
range of outcomes from wages and work to social
stigma and gender dynamics, and today we're going to
focus mostly on basic income, the impact of poverty
on society, socialism, and some other related topics. So
Doctor Kalnitsky, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to everyone. Thanks very much. So, let's start
with basic income. First of all, what is basic
income and is there one single understanding of what
basic income is, or do different people have different
proposals of what basic income should be like?
Yeah. Uh, SO basic income comes in different guises,
um, but generally I like the description that says
it's a public policy saying that we should not
have a society where people start out with a
0, in their bank account, right? So in a
good society, the starting place, uh, ought to be
that everyone gets some amount of cash that allows
for your basic needs to be met, that shouldn't
just be available to Uh, the, the children of
the rich, right? You should have it by virtue
of your membership, um, in society. Sometimes that, uh,
sometimes it refers to a demo grant, uh, that
goes to everyone, or a universal basic income, basically
a cash transfer at some above poverty level that
goes to all citizens, or sometimes it's called a
guaranteed annual income or a negative income tax. Uh,
DOING it that way, it goes to people as
soon as your income falls below some threshold, um,
you know, so, but it's, I think, kind of
different depending on who's talking, the devil's in the
details, right? So, uh, people like Charles Murray want
to introduce it, and then get rid of the
welfare state, right? He, he, he wants to more
effectively blame people for their suffering, right? That's kind
of the idea. And so perhaps you can do
that if you've already done something. For them. Um,
I like the idea as part of a broader
socialist package of institutions. I like the idea that
it gives, um, people power in labor markets, in
particular, um, it gives you a kind of exit
option from various sites of domination in your life.
Um, IT gives people more substantive freedom, some autonomy
to do the things that they want to do.
Yes, you touched on, uh, a few things there
that I actually also want to address because I
mean when it comes to basic income, since, I
mean this is something that I, I guess for
the most part we haven't had in our societies
yet, at least in a more generalized way, uh,
many people are a bit skeptical of it and
uh there are certain very, I mean, I guess
legitimate questions that people. Less so in terms of
how it would work, uh, you said there that
at least in your mind or in your opinion
it should be part of a broader, uh, package
of uh socialist measures and so we would still
have a welfare state so it wouldn't replace, it
wouldn't exist to replace other kinds of help that
people and benefits that people could get from the
state, right.
Yeah, I mean, so I think it, it works
in different ways. I think it might replace some
of the cash benefits and consolidate some of the
cash benefits, but yeah, you know, my conception of
a basic income doesn't have it replacing uh the
large parts of the welfare state, but it's a
kind of additional piece of the welfare state. Um,
THERE are different ways that it works, sort of
on, on technical grounds that The demo grant version
works in one way, the guaranteed annual income, the
negative income tax approach, it works in a slightly
different way, you know, there are symbolic differences, I
think, in like how it is organized, and, and
that is important. Um, BUT I could elaborate on
that a bit, but um, yeah.
I mean, but how would it be calculated? I
mean, the amount that everyone would get, what kinds
of needs would it need to fulfill that X
amount of money?
So, I mean, the, the actual calculation of the
benefit is going to vary, and it varies a
lot. There are a bunch of different proposals which
with different kinds of numbers. You have a very
small version in Alaska that gives people 1000 or
2000 a month, and people will call that a
a kind of demo grant. The way a negative
income tax, if, if you're interested in the way
a negative income tax works is you have some
amount that basically everybody gets. Um, AND then if
the negative income tax is, say 50%, if the,
if the, if the guaranteed income is $20,000 and
the negative income tax is 50%, if you earn,
say, $6000 on the labor market, you keep that,
and then your guaranteed income falls by half, so
like by $3000. That leaves you with like the
$600 that you earn, um, and then the The,
you know, the plus the 170 that's left, and
then as your income goes up in the labor
market, that that guarantee slowly phases out. That's the
kind of guaranteed income version. Um, THE, the Democrat,
the, the demo grant version of the universal basic
income version, um, gives you the full amount, and
then it's kind of collected all, it's all collected
back at tax time.
Mhm. Yes, the reason why I asked you earlier
if uh we would keep or we should keep
the welfare state is that I've heard um very
interesting critiques actually from people on the left, even
socialists and Marxists. Uh, SAYING that they are skeptical
of, uh, basic income because they think it would
be, uh, sort of a maneuver for people to
sort of get rid of at least some of
the social services, the benefits, and the welfare provided
by the state itself, and, uh, also they. Also
say that uh and and that's a very interesting
point I guess that different people have different needs
and so I mean if we were to use
imagining of course I'm assuming here that we would
be using basic income to uh fulfill some of
those needs. I mean the same amount wouldn't be
enough for everyone. I mean what do you make
of those critics?
Yeah, I mean, so I have a separate book
that basically says it's pretty hard to get rid
of the big pieces of the welfare state, right?
Even if you, even if you have some advocates
that might want to, I don't see a good
mechanism. For actually doing that, right? We haven't really
seen social spending. Um, MAYBE I'll talk, we'll talk
about this later, but we haven't seen social spending
go down over the 150 years of evidence that
we've seen. Um, AND so the idea that this
program in particular will Lead to a dismantling of
the welfare state. I don't, I don't entirely know
what the actual argument is, right? You could say
any introduction of any welfare, any new program could
be, ah, you're just introducing that to get rid
of something else, right? I just think empirically, it's
kind of hard. Uh, TO get rid of most
of the big features of the welfare state, and
you, you know, you like it's, it's certainly not
the version that I advocate, right? It might be
a kind of thing that some people do advocate.
Um, ON the needs point, yeah, it is true
that people have different kinds of needs, and that's
why you probably do want to retain a lot
of specialized, uh, welfare services, uh, in particular, and
disability, and so on. But it's also true that
basic income is specifically geared to the idea that
people have different needs, right? Income is useful because
you know what your needs are in specific, and
they might not be the same as, you know,
as other people, which will be kind of true
with respect to these big broad, um, public services
that are somewhat more homogeneous in terms of how
they interpret your interests.
So another, uh yeah, another question that people commonly
ask about basic income is how would it be
funded? I mean, what is your suggestion when it
comes to that?
I mean, there are a bunch of different funding
models. Blane Kenworthy has um one proposal to increase
social spending by something like 10% of GDP, and
he gets there through a bunch of different ways.
A value added tax can be one way. Um,
THERE are different kinds of uh tax instruments, and
there, you know, it's gonna depend on how expensive
the program is, right? So, you're gonna need to
get to a really high number if you have
a universal basic income. And then you'll, you'll, you'll
pay for it through clawbacks in the income tax,
and through a bunch of different tax mechanisms. If
you have a negative income tax, or if you
have a guaranteed income tax, the amount is going
to be a lot less. It's not, it's not
going to be that, so in some of the
estimates, the amount will be closer to 3% of
GDP, and how you get there, I think there
are a few different, um. There are a few
different possible ways to, to, to get there, but
they're all, I think, kind of standard tax system
methods.
But are there in calculating the amount, are there
any specific aspects of people's lives that, uh, should
be covered by it? Like, for example, I know
housing, food, basic hygiene, uh. Electricity, or I, I
mean, how do you arrive at the amount? What
should it cover
exactly? I think it's, I think it's hard to,
for me, it's hard to come to a specific
number. I don't think it should replace, you know,
public housing programs and so on. Um, I think
the way that it actually gets implemented is it
starts at some small level. And people like it,
and it slowly ratchets up from there, as long
as it is popular, which I suspect these kinds
of programs will be, rather than having some criteria,
aha, we need it to cover X, Y, Z,
um, things in in advance.
And so, uh, in this case a basic income,
uh, would be given to everyone regardless of their
employment status and whether they are actively seeking a
job. Or not, how, or how would it work
exactly? Yeah, so
that depends on the system. I think, you know,
that I do think that the somewhat more viable
version is a kind of guaranteed annual income, and
that goes down as your labor market income goes
up. Um, THE, but the other version is you
start with a relatively small demo grant that's closer
to the kind of, uh, Alaska version, um, and
that slowly ticks up.
Mhm. Uh, WHAT would happen if, uh, we guarantee
the decent standard of living to all citizens? I
mean, what, what should we expect from that?
Yeah, so I think this is generally a tough
question to answer. Uh, THERE'S been a number of
small, medium sized randomized control trials that try to
give us a, a kind of sense of the
answer. There have been some similar programs, uh, or
similar-ish programs that get instituted in a non-experimental setting.
So in the experiments, usually you have a treatment
and a control group. The treatment gets the income,
it's a person or it's a family. The controls
do not, where there's a participation fee. And then
you look at the treatments and control before and
after, or before and during the income. Um AND
then, you know, in terms of what would happen,
there's just a bunch of different possible questions to
ask. Uh THE classic question that they started asking
in the 70s is just, you know, Will people
goof off or not, right? Will they stop working?
Other people don't really care about this behavioral question,
um, because they mainly just want to mechanically reduce
poverty. Um, SO there's this interesting debate recently in
the argument where Kelsey Piper is summarizing. Um, SOME
of these causal effects, what happens to stress, what
happens to mental health, physical health, child development. Um,
AND she notes that like you don't see a
significant results, um, on, on, on those particular variables,
and Matt Brunig has a response where he basically
says, forget about these causal effects. Um, YOU should
just look mechanically at how much poverty falls, um,
when you give people. You don't have to worry
that this or that variable ticks up or down
by 10%, you know, who cares if there's like
an improvement in physical health? That's not what it's
supposed to do. We're just trying to get income
to people. Um, AND in defense of Piper, I
would say that, you know, the basic income debate
in recent years has just been all about these
causal effects. Um, YOU know, proponents will describe it
as a panacea. It generates all these amazing things
when you give, uh, people money, um. In the
1970s, the original sort of debate about basic income,
it was a bit of both, right? The, the,
they were basically like, OK, we want to reduce
poverty mechanically. That's the goal. We just have to
check some behavioral effects. We just have to check
that, you know, uh, not that we're going to
get these incredible effects on a bunch of different
variables, we just want to make sure the labor
market doesn't collapse. Um, AND so on. So what
would happen, I think, just kind of I think
it, so I think it maybe to elaborate a
bit more, I, I, I think it depends um
on the question, and I would also just say,
I think that there's a limited amount that we
can learn from these randomized control trials. Um, I've
written a lot about how they don't quite ask
the question that we're interested in, I think, right?
They give cash transfers to like a handful of
people in a context where most other people. GET
nothing at all, um, which is very different from
a, a real world of basic income, right? Where
everyone potentially could get it. That's how it would
be implemented, right? And in the real world, for
example, employers would notice if the whole workforce, you
know, got a basic income, right? So workers might
Work a bit less. Firms might pull wages back
up in response, that could then bring people back
in, right? Or people might work less at at
higher wages. None of that, you can't see any
of that in the randomized controlled trial set up,
um. You have a bunch of other real world
effects that that I think are ignored too, so
people might copy each other, right? If your friend
drops out of the labor market, you might too,
um, dropping out might be more appealing if others
are doing it, right? Those are, those are different
kinds of effects that are that are ignored. I
mean, the, the question of the macro questions are
sort of ignored the impact of on collective action,
if it, if there is an impact. It is,
it's ignored, right? You can potentially use basic income
as a strike fund, right? That's not going to
be included, or you could have like things, you
know, if, if some people work less, the underemployed
might work more. Um, ALL of these changes or
social norm changes, you know, insofar as you think
society and social interaction matters, um. Then, you know,
that stuff I think is worth studying. There's an
idea that the, the randomized control trial, you know,
because it's the gold standard in medicine, it, it
must be the gold standard in general, um, but
I think that there are some drawbacks, um, if
you're, if you're looking at social systems.
Yes, I, I mean this is, uh, I guess
not as much, uh, an economics argument. I mean,
perhaps it, it also is, uh, I'm not sure,
but. Um, WE hear very commonly for, from people
in general, I mean, sometimes there's
news about,
there's a piece of news on basic income that
got tested here or there, and, uh, sometimes people
react to that news saying something like, oh yeah,
but uh, I don't like the idea of basic
income because if we implemented basic income, there would
be many people that would. Just drop out of
work and then it would be people who would
be working, paying their taxes to support people who
would be, I mean, perennially unemployed and so it's
basically an argument, it's more of a philosophical argument
I guess based on the fairness or something like
that. So I mean, what do you reply to
that kind of argument that people make?
I mean, I think this is a problem with
how the experiments get set up. Uh, YOU just
don't see shot calling in advance, right? You don't
see, um, people say, ahead of the experiment, this
is, this we think would be a fine outcome.
And this we think would be uh considered good
enough, right? So people don't say, you know, if
work falls by labor supply, or even labor force
participation, if it falls by 5%, that's fine, that's
a success, right? We want to give people freedom,
and that's not such a bad thing if work
falls a little bit. Instead, what happens is after
there's an experiment, uh, it just gets Interpreted in
a bunch of different ways. So one camp will
see some small fall in work, and they'll call
it a success, and another will see the same
evidence, and they'll call it a failure. Um, THE
same, this, the same is true for some of
the experiments in the 70s that I'm more familiar
with, um, especially with respect to separation and divorce.
Uh, SO, in those, uh, in those experiments, I
mean, you had, I think it's a somewhat different
context, but you will often have a kind of
baseline of some potentially bad relationships, and then you
might have had some separation. After, um, after you
introduce the, the basic income, right, you can potentially
move out and collect a basic income as a
single person household. Um, SO I don't think that
those splits are inherently bad, but others might. So
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who, who is, um, was a,
was a well known advocate in the 70s of
um basic income, he saw some uh effects of
Uh, of divorce and separation, and he read that
as, you know, this decisive blow, um, against the
idea, and then, um, became an opponent. Um, I
just, I think a lot is going to depend
on what you value, um,
yeah, mhm. Yeah, because in that case, I mean,
if we're talking about divorce, one way of looking
at it is that people who would be in,
uh, bad relationships and bad marriages would have a
better economic opportunity to just live, right? I mean,
that, that's a, that's a positive way of looking
at it,
right? Yeah, I work on that topic, yeah.
OK, so, but look, what have we learned from
uh experiments done in recent years across the world
on basic income?
Yeah, so, I mean, despite what I've said about
These randomized control trials, I do think that some
are, you know, I think that they have been
very high quality, these, these recent experiments. There's a
recent experiment in Compton, California, and RCT, uh, and
found very few significant effects on a range of
outcomes. I think that should be taken seriously, um,
and at least the basic income advocates that really
care about a lot of those specific effects might
be. I'm worried. Um, ON the other hand, I,
I do think that we, um, should consider the
limits of randomized control trials. I think what I
would like to see more of is a kind
of, is the sort of saturation site experiment that
that I studied in um my PhD. So my
PhD work is on this experiment where a whole
town, Dauphin, Manitoba has access to a basic income.
It's not just the kind of The way that
they do it now, um, and the way that
they did it did it then, um, it's not
just you a handful of people scattered in an
ordinary labor market. When the whole town has access
to a basic income, it's a bit closer. You
can capture the direct and the indirect, um, effects,
and I think you can learn a bit more.
It's a bit closer to the kind of general
equilibrium. Um, EFFECTS. It's, I think the Dauphin, Manitoba
case, the Mincom case is still the only example
of a saturation experiment, at least in a, in
a rich country. Um, THAT is, you know, that
comes a bit closer to how it might look.
In, in that case, the Mincom case, you have
about 10,000 people, um, who in principle could, um,
access basic income. My own papers look at a
bunch of different Things, labor force participation, wages, crime,
violence, um, some other topics, yeah.
Yeah, I'm going to ask you about the outcomes,
but I mean, have we ever had um any
government uh trying or doing an experiment on basic
income on the level of the entire country? Has
that ever happened?
No, not really. You don't, you don't quite have
that. You've got. Uh, YOU'VE got A case like
Dauphin, where you have a whole town, you have
programs that are similar-ish in some ways, you know,
programs directed to older people, for example, programs that
are income transfers, but have some conditionality associated with
them. But no, you don't have a uh a
full throated basic income implemented in certainly in in
a in a rich country. Um, AND so, You
know, I think advocates have to be humble with
respect to what you can know.
And and do you think that it would be
harder to move from the local to the country
level in terms of implementing basic income?
In terms of generalizing, do you mean in terms
of,
yes, yes.
Yeah, I mean, I, I do, that's a problem
too. I mean this is a standard problem with
any kind of experiments. Can you generalize? Do you
have external validity, right? In my case, there's, there's
tons of problems. It's a Town in the 1970s.
It's a rural town. There's lots of differences, um,
obviously, but I do think that those kinds of
experiments that attempt to capture social interaction effects are
the ones that are going to be closer to
the kind of national level effects.
Mhm. And what have been the outcomes of a
recent experiments on basic income?
So, you know, I, I, as I've said, with
basic income, you can study anything, um, and people
do, and I have too, the sort of causal
or behavioral effects, they just run the gamut. Basic
income is said to improve a whole slew of,
uh, things, you know, or you could just look,
does it mechanically reduce poverty? Does it, um, um,
impact inequality, and so on. Um, I have papers
on wages and work, for example, um,
so I, so, so tell us about that then.
So I have a paper with, uh, John Latner.
We find in the Dauphin case a labor force
participation decline. Um, IN the treatment town, um, but
I also have a couple papers that ask about
what people were up to when they dropped out
of work. Um, SOME people suggest that they drop
out for reasons related to education. Others for care
work, others say they dropped out because of work
conditions. Um, SOME people do seem to say they
just did not want to work. Um, IN one
paper we find that, and then I have a
separate paper on wages, uh, which comes from a
business survey, a survey of businesses, um. In the
town, and in then in control towns before and
then during the experiment, and there, um I find
that wages were pulled up. So, uh, there's this
whole literature that asks whether basic income is really
just an employer subsidy. Does it just let firms
lower wages, um, but at least here it looks
like it's not the case. Firms did not like
it. They thought it made workers too choosy. It,
uh, forced wages up, um, on new hires. So,
um, that's the, that's at least the, the outcome
in, in this specific context.
And when it comes to the aspect you also
mentioned about just mechanically reducing poverty and inequality, do
we have good enough data on that?
Well, it, it, it depends on the study that
you look at. I don't, I don't have any.
Um, I don't have, uh, any analysis in mind
that looks at the impact on inequality in the
Minum case, but you see a virtual decline, like
decline of poverty to zero, almost mechanically happening. I,
I think to some extent there's no analysis, uh,
needed, right? You, in the, in the case of,
um, in the case of, uh, Dauphin, you do
have this sort of automatic effect, where anyone who
falls below some kind of threshold um is able
to access income, so income poverty will decline, um.
So, um, do you think that basic income can
contribute to building social solidarity in any way?
Yeah, so this is, I think this is controversial,
and again, I don't know how it would go.
Um, I don't think people should be confident on
this question, but I did find that in the
Mincom case, people saw it as non-stigmatizing, right? You
just don't have the same bright line between people
getting some support, some government support, and then everyone
else, right? People in so this paper is more
qualitative, and people would talk about welfare. As something
for the poor, for lazy people. But then they
would, these are people who are on Min income,
they would say, you know, they would see Minum
as practical, right? They would say they would never
ask for welfare because they're not lazy, but they
joined Mincom because it was helpful. Um, AND so,
that's just part of the way that universal programs
can potentially blur lines between Uh, people where categorical
problem, where, where categorical programs can make differences more
salient, um, but on the, on the other hand,
I think there are worries legitimate in my view,
that basic income could undermine, uh, solidarity, um, because
people just might be able to get by on
their own, right? Or they might be able to
bargain with a, with an employer on their own,
so they might not need unions as much. That's
a worry. Um, YOU could reply to that, um,
by saying that, well, basic income might also make
you less likely to defect from collective action. You're
less desperate, you're less likely to, you know, be
a scab, and so on. Um, AND then another
position is that basic income could operate as, you
know, as a strike fund, could foster solidarity in
that way, and some business groups in the 70s
did notice that effect. Um, THIS is, this was
the complaint from the National Association of Manufacturers, when
they were debating, uh, Nixon's family assistance plan. So
I think there are arguments, um, running in both
directions, um, but I would say even if you
do get somewhat less solidarity, or if you get
less cooperation, I'm not sure that's an argument in
favor of reducing people's resources, um. I say in
one of my papers that, you know, it's possible
that the net effect um makes people somewhat less
solidaristic. We don't know. It could also be true
if we discovered the Garden of Eden one day
that people would become less solidaristic, but that's not,
you know, a good argument in favor of destroying
it, I think, um.
Mhm. Uh, I think you've also done work on
the potential impact that basic income can have on
gender dynamics. Uh, Tell us about that.
Yeah, um, so there are a few different ways
I think basic income can impact, um, gender dynamics.
In the Dauphin case, I found declines in violent
crime, much of which is domestic violence. I have
a couple papers on this with Pilar Gelon's ponds,
um. Of course, there's also totally separate topic. There's
this worry just that um basic income could cut
against gender equality if women work disproportionately less. In
my own data, we can't really tell if that
happened, but it looks like in the 70s experiments,
um women did work. Or reduce work more than
uh men, so the effect is possible. I think
it would be less likely to be true today,
and there's gonna obviously be an interaction with child
care um policy, but, you know, I think, again,
there's a similar kind of question to ask from
before. Even if it is true that some people,
that some women work less, um, you have to
ask, is that a good reason to take The
money away from them, right? So if you give
people more freedom, sometimes you won't like their choices,
um, but is that a good, uh, reason to
impose more restrictions on them, right? Is, is it
bad if a female, uh, Walmart worker who wants
to quit is able to? I'm not so sure.
Um, I could talk a bit more about the
domestic violence, um, stuff too, but I'll, I'll let
you.
Uh, NO, yeah, tell us also about that, about
the domestic impact, the impact on domestic violence, if
any, yeah.
Right, so we find this effect, and then we're,
we're trying to sort of theorize about it and
look for evidence in, in a separate paper. 11
theory about why domestic violence might decline, says it's
financial stress. Um, SO insofar as financial stress increases
the likelihood of conflict and violence. And insofar as
income reduces financial stress, you might have a reduction
in domestic violence. Um, A second possible mechanism suggests
that basic income might mean that women who are
in bad or potentially abusive relationships, they have more
of an opportunity to leave, potentially just reducing actual
exposure. Uh, TO, to violence, you know, you could
move out and collect payments on your own. Um,
AND third, it could be that women don't actually
have to move out. But basic income could impact
the balance of power inside of a relationship. It
could make the threat of exit more credible, um,
and I think that reflects a kind of, uh,
feminist intuition that domestic violence is rooted in these
power inequalities. Um, AND so we have this survey
data, and mainly we find support for the first
mechanism, um. That, you know, it appears to be
that income reduces some financial stress, and then reduces
um conflict. Um, BUT there is also a, maybe
I should say there's a separate finding in that
paper where we compare couples. At the baseline who
were high disagreement couples, and then those at the
baseline who were low disagreement, um, and when you're
asking everybody on average about sort of talk of
divorce and talk of separation, you, you see no
effect. But then when you just look at the
bad relationships, you do see that um there's more
talk of divorce once that group gets um income.
And then when you look just at the good
relationships, The good relationship couples, the sort of low
disagreement couples, there's somewhat less talk about divorce. So
it could be that there's an interaction. It could
be that basic income strengthens uh decent couples, but
sort of undermines bad couples, perhaps.
Uh, SINCE we're talking about gender dynamics, it, it
just came to my mind that, uh, even, uh,
we have data for, for, for this, uh, that
even in the most gender equal countries like the
Scandinavian countries, it's still true that women do most
of the house. Work and many times people on
the left talk about how we should um value
this kind of non-remunerated work that people do at
home particularly do you think that a basic income
could also help with that?
Yeah, I mean the sort of old version of
this argument is wages for housework, which seems to
my mind to be a kind of bad idea.
You, you are sort of like making the assumption
and insisting by making the program categorical that Women
are doing domestic work. I think it could be
the case that people make the choices, uh, that
they make, um, but I, I wouldn't, I think
I wouldn't be in favor of that kind of
a categorical. Program. I would also say that it's
true that you see those, uh, those gaps in
domestic labor, but from the data that I've seen,
you also see a closing of those gaps on
most, certainly on childcare. Um, ON a range of
domestic, uh, labor fronts, there's some things like laundry,
I feel like have been, um, have moved the
least, but a lot of other, uh, gender gaps
in terms of domestic labor have closed to, to
some extent, um. Over the, you know, over the
past 40 years.
So because basic income, as you said, there's a
lot to do with trying to reduce poverty, what
effects does poverty have on people's lives?
Right, so I mean, this is, uh, I feel
like there, this is such a, that's a very
big question, and I, I kind of don't know
how to Begin to answer uh a question about
the effect of, of poverty on people's lives. Like
I, I have a paper on structural and individualist
views, and we do talk about some behavioral effects
of poverty, um, so we can think about the
effects of poverty on work. There's a book called
Scarcity that specifically focuses on the causal effects of
poverty. I like this book by Charles Creli, um,
who talks a lot about the impact of poverty
on work, um, the, the ways in which poverty
makes it rational to work somewhat. Uh, LESS, which
is sort of runs contrary to the expectation that
you get from standard, you know, diminishing marginal utility
from neoclassical economics, which suggests that, you know, the
first, uh, dollar is the most valuable dollar, so
the, the poorest among us should work the most,
and so on, and Creli has this interesting, um,
Argument why that why why that might not be
the case, um, but yeah, I'm, I'm sort of
focused in that paper more on how to think
about, um, Poverty from an individualist versus a structural
point of view.
Oh, OK, so then tell us about that. What,
what are individualist and structural explanations of poverty, and
what are the differences between them?
Right, so I should say that most the way
that I set up this paper is, I emphasize
that basically most poverty research um in the United
States is highly individualist and it's kind of methodological
strategy. So even when it's more liberal, uh, I
think this is true, and in part this is
because researchers, the way that they study the world,
they American poverty researchers in particular, they typically study
only the US and they do so at the
micro level using micro level data of either individuals
or households. So they'll find an American data set,
they'll find attributes of individuals and households. You know,
you'll be able to determine at the individual or
at the household level, single motherhood or education level,
or you'll find some variable that tells you something
about grit or whatever it is. But even in
this kind of program, you could think about class
background that attaches to an individual parent's income and
so on, um, and then they might discover. In
regression analysis, that single motherhood, say, is linked to
poverty status, and then they conclude, I think in
that research, um, they conclude that single motherhood therefore
causes poverty, and I'm in this in the paper,
I'm trying to sort of emphasize how that ignores
a structure, um, how, how structure can generate the
causal link that you're completely ignoring. Um, THE way
that I, I try to describe structure with a
bunch of simple examples in that paper, I'm, I
take an analogy from this philosopher Harold Kincaid. Um,
WHICH I can elaborate. Um, HE, he basically says,
OK, if you want to think about structure, this
is an example. He says, imagine a bunch of
dogs in a pen, some are big, some are
small, some have grit, others have less grit, and
so on. And then someone dumps a bag of
bones into the pen, and then there's a fight.
And after the fight, there's eventually you get dog
poverty, right? Some have more, others end up with
less, and that dog poverty can then be explained
in the individualist mode by the attributes of the
dog, right? We, we learn when if we have
the data on them, we learned that some have
grit. Others don't, and so on. And the structuralist
says, no, what you're missing is an account of
the bag, or the bones in the bag, right?
If you have a bag with more bones than
dogs, you're not going to end up with dog
poverty. OK, so he says, and I, I think
like the sort of structuralist says, well, what explains
poverty? It could be, we could still use individual
attributes in part to tell us who falls where,
um. But those individual attributes do not add up
to a separate account of the distribution itself, right,
of the bones in the bag, um, and, and
likewise, it could be true that single motherhood might
explain poverty when you take for granted the structure
of, of America, right? Uh, BUT in other countries
that might not. Right? Perhaps that's just because you
have less poverty, or no poverty at all, or
the link is absent, given how the structure in
that country organizes the allocation of income, um, and
you just can't see that if you're only looking
inside it at like, let's say American data, um,
it's the kind of thing that starts to come
into view when, for example, you look across national
analysis, um. But just looking at the American uh
context and micro level data takes structure for granted.
That's the kind of arguments I'm trying to make.
Uh, AND even in the United States, I mean,
because I know that these arguments surrounding single parent
or single mother households is, uh, very, is used
a lot, particularly by conservatives, people on the right
who are particularly when they want to apply it
to, um, black communities because. I, I mean, at
least as far as I know, if I'm wrong,
please correct me, but it seems that there are
more, uh, single mothers raising kids among, uh, black
communities than among white communities, but, uh, but then
they use that to argue that to or to
make a racist argument that it has to do
with their culture, with, uh, black culture. Culture and
not with anything related to structure. I mean, is
there, um, is there good enough evidence to support
such an argument?
Well, yeah, I mean that's kind of the argument
that I'm trying to criticize. Um, YOU get to
those conclusions that lead to aha, we can blame
individuals for their action, for their culture, for their
laziness, and so on. Um, WHATEVER, however, you sort
of conclude the argument, the point by, by emphasizing
sort of structure in, in this case is that
you're, you're taking for granted your conclusions. You're, you're,
you're rather assuming your conclusions, and that can be
true even when you have a sort of strong,
and I think, you know, and perfectly well designed
uh study. A regression analysis that links one attribute
to another attribute. It's just that you're ignoring, um,
by fiat, by the design, um, sort of broader,
uh, causal factors. Um, THAT'S kind of the, the,
the point.
Right. So let's talk about socialism then. First of
all, what is socialism? I guess that at least
we, we here in Europe uh are at least
a little bit more familiar with certain types of
socialism, the like social democracy, but, uh, what is
socialism? I mean, how would you define it?
Yeah, well, I mean the, so the traditional Marxist
way. Of defining socialism is, you know, it's the
mirror opposite of capitalism on all fronts. Um, I
don't think that is, uh, the right way to
think about it, but I do think you want
to start with capitalism, um, and so I, I
like a definition of Capitalism. I like to use
the definition of capitalism and then see sort of
how socialism violates some part of um the definition.
So I like a definition of capitalism that gives
you a system of three parts. You have capitalist
class structures, a labor market, a goods market. The
capitalist class structure basically says means of production, the
physical inputs that generate value. Uh, YOU know, machinery,
tools, offices, stores, and so on. These are privately
owned and controlled, so you have owners and non-owners
of productive assets. And then the labor market, a
part of the definition that says those non-owners, they're
forced to work for the owners, right? Not for
any specific owner, not for any specific capitalist, but
if you fail to find one, you have no
decent alternative. And then the last piece is a
goods market, so people are Largely not, um, self-sufficient.
They obtain their means of subsistence, what they need
to survive on a market for commodities, right? So
they're market dependent. That's how Robert Brenner puts it.
And so if that's true, in the, I think
in the standard setup. Socialism is in the mirror
opposite of all of those things, right? Instead of
a class structure and private ownership of productive assets,
socialism has no class structure and public ownership. Instead
of selling your labor on the market and buying
commodities on markets and socialism, goods and labor are
coordinated through some kind of comprehensive planning process. So
usually, um, in the definition, it's you're in one
or the other world. You've, you've got no half
measures, um. I, I don't disagree with um some
of the parts of the definition, but I try
to operationalize socialism at the kind of level of
institutions, and at the level of specific mechanisms, rather
than calling a whole system socialist or capitalist. My
view is more to the degree that this or
that institutional corner of the economy is designed to
meet public needs, is subject to public. Democratic oversight
and control, it ought to be seen as socialist.
So I think it's reasonable to say that, you
know, healthcare in most rich countries satisfies that criteria.
Um, YOU know, if the overarching objective is designed
in a kind of democratic context, if money is
pulled out of private hands and geared to satisfy
public needs, I think it It ought to count,
and then the, the more pervasive the mechanisms are,
the more we can consider, um, the economy broadly
socialist. Um, SOME people want to say no, we
should only think about public ownership, um, you know,
the stock of socialism, but I think there are
other forms of public organization of economic life, and
need satisfaction that do capture what socialists are, are
after, um. And so in in my book, I,
I've, I've made this socialism index that includes a
bunch of different variables, like social spending, public ownership,
public employment, co-determination, demodification, um, I, i the how,
how much income lets you, how, how public income
can let you exit the market. Um, AND I
think all of that kind of captures the, um,
some of the core ideas in the definitions that
I have of capitalism and socialism, but that's a
more continuous variable, and so I can see what
happens when we grow socialism here or there, what
happens when it's high, um, and low, and so
on.
So would you classify the sort of social democracy
or at least certain social democratic policies that we
have implemented here in several countries in Europe, would
you classify that as a form of socialism?
Yeah, I mean, I basically, I just rank all
of the countries um by on the socialism index.
I rank by Decade by sort of country decade,
so you can see where the highest levels of
socialism are and where the lowest levels are. Um,
AND then, you know, perhaps to kind of get
more at the kind of core socialism index idea,
I also look at the sort of change. So
you're kind of holding the context constant, and I'm
looking at sort of the change in socialism, um,
over some particular over a period, let's say a
decade, and I'll sort of rank. Um, PERIODS, country
periods in the same way where we can see
what were the periods where socialism increased the most
versus decreased the most and, and so on.
Mhm. Uh, I mean, what are the main critiques
of capitalism that socialism puts forth, and I mean,
uh, what is socialism actually supposed to remedy when
it comes to those critics?
Uh, YEAH, so in my book, I focus on,
I mean, I think this is a question that's
often taken for granted, um, and you have to
sort of give a, a normative critique of capitalism
that socialism then addresses. I feel like it's often
the case that people don't want to do this,
but I focus on Um, a few normative critiques,
um, I emphasize sort of the ways that capitalism
can undermine freedom, the ways it can undermine democracy,
how it can generate unnecessary levels of inequality, poverty,
suffering. It's not that capitalism is the worst of
all possible worlds, but it's, uh, that it falls
short of what could be in, in terms of
standards of living, and there's no mechanism internal to
it to close the gap between, you know, what
is and what could be, um. And so you
can look at some of the features of capitalism
that we've described, sort of the, the definition, um,
or the, the definitions of capitalism, and by contrast
of socialism, um, and sort of see this where
the normative critiques kind of fall. So the labor
market criterion I, I mentioned above, you're forced to
sell your labor on the labor market, um. That,
I think in a lot of ways undermines freedom
in this kind of standard way. Marx calls it
a double freedom. You're free to sell your labor
to whoever you want, failing that, you're free to
starve, right? You're forced not to work for any
specific capitalist, but to sell your labor to someone.
Um, NOW you might say, OK, that's fine, um,
but it does, I think, undermine your negative freedom,
um, and it's at the core of, of capitalist
economies, um, and socialism by decommodifying labor, by generating
incomes for people irrespective of the market, through a
range of mechanisms, pensions, unemployment, leave, etc. IT starts
to address, I think, that unfreedom. Um, OR you
could go to the class structure definition, right? So
you have owners and non-owners of the means of
production. I think that violates a pretty standard definition
of democracy, the sort of 60s definition of democracy,
which I like is that, you know, people should
have an impact on decisions that affect their lives.
Um, WELL, if you have a small group that
controls investment. That just means that they more or
less control the future, right? How green technologies are
gonna be, how oppressive they are, what work looks
like, and so on. These decisions, investment decisions have
these big public ramifications, but they're made by a
small group, um, which I think undermines democracy. Again,
if you care about democracy, and then socialism. On
this front is at least meant to bring uh
democratic decision making into economic life through some means.
Um, COULD just be public ownership, um, which varies
in rich countries, um, and is a step towards
having a part of the economy under a more
sort of democratic. Purview. So, you know, if you
care a lot more, if you care more about
freedom, you'll often work more in the labor market
parts, and if you care more about democracy, you'll
often emphasize the sort of class structure parts, um,
and in my book, I try to run through
a range of more specific critiques of capitalism, explain
why socialism is meant to remedy those critiques, and
then I, I ask, um, are those claims actually
true? So, uh, do they show up empirically? So
I look, I look at my socialism, the socialism
index, and I look to see the extent to
which it empirically correlates or not with separate indicators
of democracy, freedom, equality, well-being, and so on. Um,
AND I think there's some evidence in favor of
the claims.
Right. So let me ask you, because particularly when
we hear from people who identify as Marxist and
even the ones who go all the way to
identifying as communists, um, they say that because I,
I mean to put it in simple terms that
because the system is rigged against the working class,
the bourgeoisie controls the means of production. And they
won't uh just give up power, uh, I mean
that that the only way, the only possible route
to socialism is through revolution. I mean, do you
think that that's the only possible route?
So yeah, I'm trying to argue the exact opposite
kind of line in in my book. Um I
have a chapter on revolution, um, and I basically
think that if that is your conclusion, if you
conclude That revolution is the only path to socialism,
then more or less you can't have socialism. Um,
I have a lot of data on revolution across
history and revolutionary moments. Um, AND one core finding,
which goes back to Adam Shaworsky, one finding is
that once societies reach some very minimal level of
per person annual income, 5K, 10K per person, revolution
just disappears, um, from the data. Right? So people
have more to lose than their chains. They do
have something to lose at that level of development,
and I think it makes uh people risk averse,
some reasonably risk averse, right? They're not confident that
the revolution will bring gains. Um, I think this,
you know, it's not false consciousness. This is a
materialist analysis that explains why you just don't get
revolutions once you have some modest level of development,
um. And it's not just that revolutions um don't
appear because the forces of repression are too high
once you get moderate levels of development, although that's
also true. Um, I think it's more that workers
just don't want it, um, anymore, and so I
have a lot of data from the World Values
Survey, which looks at, um, there's one interesting question
that looks at reform, revolution, and conservatism. Um, AROUND
the world, and so I'm kind of restricting the
group to low income people who self-identify in the
bottom third, um, of the income ladder at the
proletariat, arguably. Um, THEY'VE been running this survey for
something like 45 years, and I think they include
around 100 countries. Um, AND the revolutionaries, um, are
just always this tiny minority in the group. Um,
IT'S not what people want, and so this is
true for rich countries where revolutionaries are always a
tiny set, but it's basically true around the world.
Uh, THE majority of, again, this is low income
people in the OECD it's something like 80% who
identify as reformists, um. A smaller group you can
call conservative, um, they say, you know, the, the
question asks whether the status quo should be defended,
um, that captures something like 15%, it can get
a bit higher too. Um, BUT then the people,
um, who say they want to overthrow the system,
um, the question is phrased something like, you know,
the entire way society is organized must be radically
changed through revolutionary action, that ends up being around
5% in the OECD. Um, IT'S, I think, I
conclude that it's not a majoritarian project, and Um,
revolutionaries just haven't really come close, uh, to the
reformists anywhere in the data, apart from there are,
there are a couple, um, examples of, of brief
moments where it happens around the world, but never
for a sustained period.
Is there evidence that revolutions can have spillover effects
in terms of democracy and equality? I mean, can
events in one nation influence social life in adjacent
ones?
Yeah, so I have a paper on this topic
that I wrote with Caitlin Wanamaker, and the conclusions
a little bit are at odds, um, with my
previous comments on revolution, but the the whole idea
uh comes from a kind of offhanded remark, I
think, in Piketty's first book about the, the threat
of the Soviet, how the threat of the Soviet
Union led European. Welfare states to be more redistributive.
Um, THERE are other scholars who work on the
topic, Magnus Rasmussen, Carl Knutzen, um, have done work
on this question, but yeah, that's the, that's the
core question that we're trying to ask in this
paper. Revolutions might have effects not just, uh, in
one country, in the country where it happens, but
also, um, in neighboring countries, and this is, this
kind of reflects an old debate. Um, IN Marxism,
sort of between Trotsky and Stalin, you know, they're
asking, does revolution in one country spark revolution in
another, um, and we're, we're kind of asking does
revolution in one country spark reform. Um, IN, in
another, so we use this cross-national data set of
revolutions over, you know, 200 years for they have
something like 170 countries. Um, WE'RE also looking at
not quite revolutions at coups, protest led ousters as
they're called, um, and basically what what we're looking
at is what happens to your country, um, following
a revolution in a neighbor. So in the five
years after that revolution, are there increases in, say,
democracy or equality? Um, AND, you know, not all
of the, um, measures that we look at see
effects, but we do see significant increases in one
of our two democracy measures and in both of
our equality measures. Um, WE don't see changes in
suffrage or Legal equality, um, but the effects that
we do see, uh, to my mind, seem pretty
robust. We use a bunch of methods to see
if we can make the effect go away, um,
but they're fairly stable. So it, it's possible that
they're real, that revolution could foment reform. Um, TO
a certain extent, this is the opposite of the
old socialist intuition, right, that revolution in one country
is, is actually weakening its prospects of spreading because
revolution foments reform, right? It's, this is not the
Trotsky argument, um. But, you know, on the other
hand, the conclusions might be uncomfortable for reformists like
myself, uh, to, you know, peaceful reformers might really
benefit from the looming threat of revolution, you know,
uh, you'll take Martin Luther King. Seriously, if Malcolm
X is in the background, etc. um, YEAH, but
you know, to some extent I think the, the
discussion is moot because as I've argued, you really
don't see revolution once you reach a certain level
of development, um, but the general point perhaps, um.
You know, it's maybe not that revolution, but, but
militancy can be an important part of a reformist
strategy. I, you know, I don't think this is
the main channel. I have a different paper that
looks at social change over the past 60, 70
years, and it finds You know, this is, it's
left-wing political parties that have the biggest impact on,
for example, social spending, but, you know, I do
think you want to consider how serious threats can
change the calculation, um, on the part of elites.
That's kind of what the paper emphasizes.
OK, so one last question then, is there instead
of a revolutionary road, a policy road toward socialism?
Right, um, so yeah, this is the topic of
the book that I'm, that I'm finishing now. Basic
question is, you know, is there a gradual policy
driven uh road to socialism, or are reforms just
always self defeating? Do they run out of steam?
Do they hit a ceiling, and so on. A
lot of people, I think on the far left
want to say, sure, reforms can make life nicer,
but They can't really change, it can't really change
capitalism in, in a deep, in a qualitative way.
And also, by the way, they're reversible. They're always
reversible. Rosa Luxembourg says this, progressive socialization is a
fantasy, um, and you know, the center left has
a kind of version of this too for somewhat
similar, somewhat different reasons, but yeah, you know, give
up on socialism, it hits limits, it's not economically
viable. Um, AND I think there are good reasons
for that view, to support that view. Um, IT'S
sometimes called the Marxist theory of the state, which
sounds fancy, um, but the, the core, and there
are different versions of that argument, but it, it
basically says socialist reforms. ARE gonna either empower workers,
or they're going to require taxes, that's going to
reduce profitability, that's going to lead to capital flight,
right? If capital exits, employment will fall. State revenue
will then fall, and so even if you have
this kind of perfect in this sort of like
in in this scenario where you have a completely
sincere socialist party in power, you still can't do
the things that you were elected to do, gradualism
fails, um. And so Marxists in, you know, the
year 1900, if they're asked to predict the growth
of things that you do see, you know, like
public social spending, de modification, public ownership, you know,
co-determination, all of that, they would say no, um,
and they did say no, um, it's impossible, or
If you do it, it will just be reversed.
We can't have nice things, um, and I, you
know, there's a similar set of predictions today, um,
and so my starting point is the empirical record
in rich countries, and when you zoom out, And
look at the long term evidence, you do have
moments of retrenchment over the past century and a
half, we might be in one now, um, but,
you know, in large part in rich capitalist democracies,
you get more or less the opposite of those
predictions. You get these world historic incremental reforms, they
produce huge gains in living standards, giant declines in
material deprivation and poverty, and they stick, right? So,
Public health care, pensions, shorter working hours, these gains
are basically unidirectional. Um, YOU see occasional tweaking of
sort of public health care programs, but when they
are introduced, they are never repealed, right? And, and
public social expenditures, they've basically grown for 150 years.
Again, occasionally they plateau, but they don't fall, I
mean that's a big part of why standards of
living have improved. Uh, DRAMATICALLY, yeah, I see that
as, you know, knitting socialism into the fabric of
capitalism, bit by bit. Um, WHAT was seen as
impossible is later, um, taken for granted, that, you
know, that's what I call the policy road to
socialism. Um, SOCIALIST reforms are popular, popular reforms get
defended by ordinary people, and that's why they're robust,
um, over time. So, yeah, the book is framed
as a kind of um you have the skeptics
intuition that reforms always get reversed, um and then
you have perhaps like the the populist um intuition.
It it used to be called terrible language, but
it used to be called the legitimation function. Um,
ELITES will get in trouble, um, if they undermine
the standards of living for the majority long enough.
Beneficiaries push back, um, especially when programs are big
and universal. So there's this ratchet effect, and I'm
trying to test this idea, um, empirically in in
the book,
um, right. So, uh, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet, and by
the way, what should people be on the lookout
for when it comes to your upcoming book?
Well, the book is going to be called The
Road to Socialism or the Policy Road to Socialism.
The latter isn't a particularly snappy title, so I
might try to change it. Otherwise, you can Google
my name. Um, I have some articles in Jacobin
too that might be. Worth looking at, and you
can find my website, which links to um most
everything, um, as well. So
yeah, great, I'm leaving links to that in the
description and thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
very interesting conversation.
Thank you very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janaertner,
Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my
producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden,
Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz, and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.